blows my [ __ ] mind but meditation
literally protects you from heart
attacks literally physiologic mechanisms
it's like anyone a fourth-year medical
student if I took the time if we were
talking on chat I could walk a
fourth-year medical student through this
process it's not BS it's just literally
how our body works
as well learn something new we're doing
physical meditation dadbod or do you
guys want to do something a little bit
more mental how about I teach you guys
how to breathe okay so I'm gonna teach
you guys how to breathe so so thanks for
the sob gizmo so here's here's what
we're gonna do I want you guys to just
breathe in we're gonna start with
abdominal breathing so I want you to do
is try to hold your chest as steady as
possible and as you breathe in I want
you to push your stomach out and as you
breathe out I want you to pull pull your
stomach in and pull your navel towards
your spine sound on notifications is
very loud alert box okay I'll teach you
guys how to sit - we'll teach you how to
sit posture is easy so I want you guys
when you breathe out so I'm gonna stop
reading to it shut
so stop typing because if you're typing
you're probably not breathing so when
you breathe in let your navel come out
when you breathe out pull your stomach
in
now I want you guys to watch regular
breath so watch my shoulders
that's right dealer breath right you
guys see how much my chest and shoulders
are moving abdominal breath you guys got
that
so Valley comes out when you inhale and
belly moves back in when you exhale okay
so now we're gonna add the second phase
of what this practice is called
triphasic breathing so now when you're
fully inhaled with your belly then what
I want you to do is mindfully expand
your chest and then breathe more so
there's gonna be like a second phase you
guys feel that so valley first then
chest and what you'll find is that you
can actually breathe more than you can
with just your belly if you do the chest
breathing after so let's practice that
for three rounds
and then what we're gonna do the is the
final phase the third phase of triphasic
breathing which is gonna be you're gonna
raise your shoulders which is gonna be
clavicular breathing so you have three
areas which kind of control in the
expansion of your lungs your valley
which is your diaphragm your chest so
chest expansion is gonna be like your
your muscles around your rims and the
third area is actually your clavicles so
when you breathe in expand the chest and
then lift up your shoulders and you'll
be able to get just a little bit like
five percent more breath in and then do
each phase at a time so start with
abdomen chest clavicles abdomen chest
and clavicles if you feel dizzy take
breaks between your breaths dizziness is
from elevated co2 I mean a co2 that's
too long
if you're yawning that's fine just go
ahead and yawn don't suppress it and
then go back to the practice so now
close your eyes and do five rounds on
your own
start with the belly transition to the
chest raise the shoulders and then out
I'd say you should do this practice
before you charge your laser beams but
I'm going to stop talking for a minute
we're going to do five breaths
you
okay I'm going to answer a bunch of
questions that I see okay so the first
thing is can you change the way you
subconsciously breathe during the day
yes so if you practice breathing you'll
start to breathe less from the chest and
more from the abdomen you can train
yourself to breathe deeper you can train
yourself to breathe slower absolutely
second question domination time asks co2
to low it equals dizziness what about
co2 too high is that the same thing
absolutely not so spiritual experiences
in meditation are believed to be due to
sort of like toxic levels of co2 in the
brain so when you start to get a trippy
experience during meditation the most
prevailing or at least I think the best
neuroscience theory for why people feel
like an expansion of consciousness and
other things like that is is due to
elevated levels of co2 so what happens
when you meditate on a very regular
basis is your body acclimatize --is to
low levels of oxygen in high levels of
co2 and a very low respiratory rate okay
so if that means is that for a normal
human so I see someone understands
respiratory physiology and chat and says
co2 too high equals acidosis equals more
breathing yes that's the standard
physiologic response when your co2 is
elevated your brain tells you to breathe
more so that you can breathe off that
co2 the interesting thing is when you
meditate your body becomes acclimatized
to high levels of co2 to where it
recruits other kinds of mechanisms that
don't require rapid breathing and when
you meditate up for a very regular basis
you begin to have a very low respiratory
rate but it doesn't damage you you
shouldn't try to restrict your
respiratory rate it's just like when you
guys meditate like I don't know if you
guys realize this but your respiratory
rate is dropping right when you do like
triphasic Barre
like it's not hard to do like five
breaths a minute like it's really not
like each breath that was like a
15-second breath like maybe 12 or 15 and
so if I if it takes me if I breathe in
for seven seconds and breathe out for
seven seconds
that's a respiratory rate of four per
minute that's four breaths a minute
right which is like not that hard to do
I can tell you breathe in for seven
that's a 15-second breath so what
happens in meditation is that you your
body becomes acclimatize to high levels
of co2 in the brain and what people
believe is that when you have high
levels of co2 in the brain for prolonged
periods of time you actually start to
have like a trippy spiritual experience
the other thing that's really
fascinating is one of the ways through
which meditation protects you from heart
attacks is the other thing so it does a
question for chat does anyone know what
your heart does when it becomes starved
for oxygen who let's test people's
physiologic knowledge what is your heart
do when it it doesn't get enough oxygen
you guys know
[Music]
okay it dilates the coronary that's
correct
and what is the long-term effect of
chronic hypoxia on the heart
vasodilation is a temporary effect so it
sends signals to create collateral
circulation right so when you're when
your heart is starved for oxygen so this
is what happens in the heart as your
arteries get clogged the heart
angiogenesis that's correct so as your
heart as your arteries get clogged the
amount of space through which blood can
travel to nourish your heart goes down
as you get a blocked artery your heart
starts to become starved for oxygen as
it becomes starved for oxygen it does
two things it sends immediate signals to
dilate the artery so if we dilate the
artery we increase its it's like how
wide it is which facilitates more flow
the other thing that it does is sends
signals to create more blood vessels
angiogenesis right so when you meditate
for prolonged periods of time your
oxygen levels start to go lower but not
in a damaging way because it's like a
chronic thing your body acclimatize us
to it and it sends signals to your heart
to create collateral circulation which
in turn means that if you've got a
blocked coronary artery in your
irregular meditator the damage from that
coronary artery is going to be way less
because your body has developed
alternate paths of circulation through
meditation blows my [ __ ] mind
but meditation literally protects you
from heart attacks literally physiologic
mechanisms it's like anyone a
fourth-year medical student if I took
the time if we were talking on chat I
could walk a fourth-year medical student
through this process it's not BS
it's just literally how our body works
as our breathing rate goes down our
oxygen level goes down and you can't
normally meditate like for 20 minutes a
day until you get really good at it and
then like you have these stories of like
these Yogi's in the Himalayas that go
into like semi semi hibernation states
right and like I don't know if you guys
have heard about this stuff then you've
got other stuff like wim HOF who does
like you guys heard about wim HOF the
Iceman so this is a guy that like
learned this nepalese like this
Himalayan meditation technique which is
what they do to stay warm so you have
like these Yogi's that are living in the
Himalayas that are like not wearing
coats they just like hang out there in
like a simple shawl and the reason that
they can sustain that is because they do
bizarre things to their physiology and
like wim HOF is a guy who learned this
stuff and then it has like all these
like like physiologists like testing him
they stick him in like sub sub-zero like
temperatures and he like doesn't get
frostbite or die he just is fine
so like meditation has a lot of profound
impacts on the human body okay so we've
got a couple of other questions so let
me just get to these okay so Tom you
shouldn't be anteriorly translating your
t3 t4 vertebra your clavicles should be
going up not forward if that makes sense
okay so people are asking questions
about when I try to made it say I worry
a lot about it not going as well as it
went before that makes it very hard to
clear my mind any advice congratulations
Matt the Strummer also asked is it
normal for meditation to go really well
at first but then get more difficult
after a while absolutely so the tricky
thing about meditation is the way that
you enter the know mind state of
meditation is by having no expectations
right so like the first time if you guys
were around for charging the laser beam
technique we did a meditation technique
and I ask people what does it feel like
and one person to chat literally said it
feels like I'm charging a laser beam and
the cool thing is like when I don't tell
you what to expect your mind cannot have
an expectation and therefore you could
sit fully with the experience once you
sit with an experience and you feel like
you have some kind of experience in
meditation then that creates an
expectation to have that experience
again and that expectation makes it hard
to meditate so the most difficult
spiritual experience to have in
meditation is the second one not the
first one the first one is actually easy
and then once you start expecting then
it becomes hard because then you're
attached to that meditation then you
create the thought oh this isn't working
it's not I'm not feeling the way that I
used to feel it's not working the way
that it used to this isn't working
that's what you tell yourself when you
meditate and that thought in and of
itself is why you don't get into
meditation the state of meditation so is
it hard for it to happen is it hard for
like you to do it after a while
absolutely that's the most common
challenge in meditation and the cool
thing is once you recognize that okay
the reason I'm not able to meditate is
because I'm trying to meditate and the
reason I'm trying to meditate is because
now I understand what meditation is
because I did it before
that's a bizarre and paradoxical and
wonderful hilarious challenge and so I
would say like Matt and this person who
asked this question is it hard
absolutely just recognize that recognize
that for some time it's gonna be harder
for me to get that meditation going
again and then also to return to the
technique so your thought is you're
gonna have all these thoughts right
you're gonna be like oh it's not working
it's not working just go back to the
technique just focus on your breath
ignore whether it's working stop trying
to make it work if it's working that's
fine if it's not working that's fine to
just focus on the technique just focus
on the technique focus on the technique
focus on the technique the more you
focus on the technique that's what got
you there in the first place that's what
will get you there again